 

Implantable  medical  devices  (IMDs)  monitor  and  treat 
physiological conditions within the body of a patient. Different 
types of  IMDs such as brain neurosimulator, pacemaker, gas- 
tric implant and  cochlear implant  provide remote  monitoring 

M. Wazid is with the Center for Security, Theory and Algorithmic Research, 
International  Institute  of  Information  Technology,  Hyderabad  500  032,  India 
(e-mail: mohammad.wazid@research.iiit.ac.in). 

A. K. Das is with the Center for Security, Theory and Algorithmic Research, 
International  Institute  of  Information  Technology,  Hyderabad  500  032,  India 
(e-mail:  iitkgp.akdas@gmail.com,  ashok.das@iiit.ac.in).  (Corresponding  au- 
thor: Ashok Kumar Das.) 

N.  Kumar  is  with  the  Department  of  Computer  Science  and  Engineering, 
Thapar University, Patiala 147 004, India (e-mail: neeraj.kumar@thapar.edu). 
M.  Conti  is  with  the  Department  of  Mathematics,  University  of  Padua, 

Padua 35122, Italy (e-mail: conti@math.unipd.it). 

A. V. Vasilakos is with the Department of Computer Science, Electrical and 
Space  Engineering,  Lulea  University  of  Technology,  Lulea  971  87,  Sweden 
(e-mail: th.vasilakos@gmail.com). 

 
 

 

and treatment to patients with severe medical conditions. The 
pervasiveness of  IMDs is growing continuously, for example, 
25 million US citizens reliant on them for their day to day life 
critical functions [1]. The global IMDs market was valued at 
$72, 265 million in 2015, and is projected to reach $116, 300 
million  by  2022,  registering  a  compound  annual  growth  rate 
(CAGR)  of  7.1%  from  2016  to  2022  [2].  Information  and 
communication  technology  (ICT)  facilitates  the  information 
exchange  of  IMDs  and  provides  them  capabilities  to  com- 
municate with each other.  IMDs  have  the  ability  to   send 
the  collected  health  related  data  of  a  patient  to  the  nearby 
controller  node  (CN )  using  the  communication  technologies 
such  as   bluetooth,   zigbee   and   infrared   transmission.   CN 
is  more  powerful  node  as  compared  to  IMDs    as    it    has 
more  communication  range,  processing  power  and  storage 
capability.  CN  is  connected  to  the  Internet  using  an  access 
point. A user  (for  example,  a  doctor)  can  access  the  data 
of  an  IMD  via  CN  after  successful  mutual  authentication. 
However,  in  such  kind  of  communication  environment,  there 
are  several  security  and  privacy  related  issues  such  as  replay 
attack,  man-in-the  middle  attack,  impersonation  attacks  and 
privileged-insider attack [3], [4], [5], [6]. 

 

A.  Motivation 

An  attacker  can  exploit  the  vulnerabilities  in  the  IMDs, 
which can cause negative medical effects on the health of the 
patient.  Such  effects  are  commonly  known  as  adverse  events 
[7]. According to the report available in [8], the vulnerability 
in an implanted insulin pump could be exploited by a hacker (a 
remote malicious user) which can cause an overdose of insulin 
to  the  diabetic  patients.  The  overdose  of  insulin  could  then 
cause hypoglycemia (low blood sugar level) which in extreme 
case  becomes  a  diabetic  shock  to  the  patient.  Therefore, 
security of IMDs becomes a serious concern so that an illegal 
party  can not  attack  the  IMDs  implanted in  a patient’s  body. 
Hence,  there  is  a  strong need  to  design  a  secure remote  user 
authentication scheme for IMDs by which the controller node 
of  a  patient’s  IMDs  and  a  user  (for  example,  a  doctor)  can 
mutually  authenticate  each  other.  At  the  end,  both  entities 
establish  a  secret  session  key  shared  between  them  for  their 
future  secure  communications.  To  address  such  an  important 
issue  for  IMDs  communication  environment,  we  propose  a 
new  secure  remote  user  authentication  and  key  agreement 
scheme. 

B.  Main Contributions 

The contribution of this paper is manyfold: 

•  We  propose  a  new  lightweight  three-factor  remote  user 
authentication  scheme  for  implantable  medical  devices 
in  which  the  controller node  of  the  implantable  medical 
devices of a patient and remote user can authenticate each 
other. 

•  The security analysis shows that the proposed scheme is 
secure.  In  addition,  we  test  the  formal  security  verifica- 
tion  of  the  proposed  scheme  using  the  widely-accepted 
AVISPA tool to show the proposed scheme is also secure 
against the replay and man-in-the middle attacks. 

•  We  provide  the  practical  implementation  of  the  pro- 
posed  scheme  using  the  widely-used  NS2    simulation 
tool  to  measure  the  impact  of  the  scheme  on  network 
performance  parameters  such  as  end-to-end  delay  and 
throughput. 

C.  System Models 

The  following  two  models  are  considered  to  describe  and 

analyze the proposed scheme in the paper. 

1)  Network  Model:  The  network  model  for  the  (IMD)s 
communication environment shown in Figure 1 is used in the 
proposed scheme. In the given model, we have different types 
of IMDs, such as brain neurosimulator and gastric simulator, 
which are implanted in a patient’s body. There is a controller 
node (CN ) which collects data from all IMDs using wireless 
communication  technologies  (for  example,  bluetooth,  zigbee 
and  infrared  transmission).  CN  is  connected  to  the  Internet 
through an access point. The users can access  IMDs through 
CN . Suppose there is a user (for example, a doctor) Ui  wants 
to  access  the  data  from  the  controller  node  belonging  to  a 
set  of  implantable  medical  devices.  In this  scenario,  we  need 
authentication  between  Ui  and  CN . 

 

 

 

Fig.  1.   Network  model  of  IMDs  communication  environment 

2)  Threat Model:  The well-known Dolev-Yao threat model 
(DY model) [9] is used in the proposed scheme. Under the DY 
model, the communication takes place over insecure channels. 
Any two communicating parties can communicate each other 
using  a  public  channel  [10],  in  which  the  end-point  entities, 
such as IMDl, CN , and Ui, are not considered as trusted. An 

attacker A can then have the opportunity to eavesdrop, modify 
or  delete  the  exchanged  messages  during  the  transmission  in 
order to tamper the communicated data. A can also physically 
capture  CN  and  can  extract  the  stored  information  by  using 
the power analysis attacks [11], [12] as these devices are non- 
tamper resistant. However, all IMDs are implanted inside the 
body  of  a  patient,  and  hence,  there  is  a  rare  possibility  of 
physical capturing of IMDs from a patient’s body. We further 
assume  that  the  trusted  authority  (T A)  is  fully  trusted  party 
in  the  network,  which  is  responsible  for  pre-deployment  of 
IMDs and the user registration phase as described in Section 
III. 

D.  Structure of the Paper 

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  In  Section 
II,  we  discuss  the  existing  related  authentication  schemes 
proposed  for  IMDs.  The  various  phases  of  the  proposed 
scheme  are  discussed  in  Section  III.  The  security  analysis  of 
the  proposed  scheme  is  provided  in  Section  IV.  The  formal 
security verification of the proposed scheme using the widely- 
accepted AVISPA tool is given in Section V. The performance 
comparison  of  the related  existing  schemes  and the  proposed 
scheme is provided in Section VI. The practical demonstration 
of  the  proposed  scheme  using  the  widely-accepted  NS2  sim- 
ulation tool is also provided in Section VII. Finally, the paper 
is concluded in Section VIII. 

 

The  use  of  IMDs  facilitates  the  remote  monitoring  of  the 
health of a patient. The IMDs specially improve the quality of 
life of elderly people, who  other has problem to move easily. 
A  doctor  can  provide  them  remote  consultation  on  the  basis 
of  their health  data,  which  is collected  by the  help  of IMDs. 
However, wireless communication raises serious threats in the 
IMD  deployment.  In  this  paper,  we  proposed  a  remote  user 
authentication  scheme  through  which  a  user  (a  doctor)  and 
a  controller  node  can  mutually  authenticate  each  other  and 
establish a session key for their future secure communication. 
Apart  from  that  the  pairwise  key  establishment  between  a 
controller node and its IMDs is also provided in the proposed 
scheme  for  the  secure  communication  between  them.  The 
computation and communication costs of the proposed scheme 
are comparable with the existing related schemes. In addition, 
the  proposed  scheme  also  provides  better  security  and  more 
functionality features, such as password and biometric update 
phase, dynamic controller node and IMD addition phases, as 
compared to other existing related schemes. 

 

 
 

 
 
 


